Based on my analysis, a model of generative change emerged.

The model depicts the processes of cognitive change—metacognitive awareness, ideological becoming, internalization, and generativity—that take place. As teachers (and their students) move toward generativity, their internal changes are reflected in their discourses and practices. Phase 1 emphasizes the use of reflection through the narrativization of experiences that motivate increased metacognitive awareness concerning the role of literacies in teachers’ lives and in the lives of others. Engagement with this reflection results in an increased sense of personal awakening.

Phase 2 in the process of generative change emphasizes introspection that requires teachers (and their students) to look within themselves. As teachers engaged in discussions and writing about issues related to diversity and literacy, they were motivated to take a stand on issues, to locate their level of personal involvement, and to decide if these perspectives would be embraced or rejected. These activities were designed to facilitate the process of ideological becoming, which resulted in an increased sense of agency.

During Phase 3, the classroom community focused on facilitating internalization through critiques of course readings and through the analysis of action research projects that teachers selected to work on to increase their sense of advocacy. The teachers developed action research projects focusing on the literacy practices of their students. The action research projects served as a catalyst to facilitate the development of generative thinking skills.

The fourth phase represents the point at which learners combined theory, best practices, and actual work in communities with diverse populations in ways that facilitated their own theory posing and generative thinking. During this process, they wrote and talked not only about opportunities, challenges, and need for changes but also about the actions they took. This process resulted in an increased sense of efficacy and the development of their voices on issues of diversity.